Hello and welcome back to our image and
video processing class.
This video, we're going to be talking
about brain imaging.
Brain imaging is an extremely exciting
area with applications in basic science,
try to understand our brain, how we
develop,
and also application in many scene as
we're going to see in this video.
We are going to start with a bit of a
discussion on a relatively new modality,
which is called diffusion-weighted MRI,
diffusion-weighted Magnetic Resonance
Imaging.
MRI is very old and it has been a
tremendous contribution to medicine.
Diffusion-weighted MRI is a, as I said, a
relatively new technique.
The reason I'm going to talk about it is
because we're going to see a very
surprising application of one of the
tools that we have learned, actually in
the segmentation week, apply now to
diffusion imaging in a very very
different scenario.
Like most of our weeks, during this
class, we could just speak this topic of
medical imaging, even the topic of
medical imaging for MRI and basically
talk for months about it.
So, as before, I'm giving you a few
examples to provide you some motivation
and some excitement about this area.
So what is diffusion-weighted imaging?
The basic idea is relatively simple, the
basic concept.
So, you have a brain,
actually, we're talking about brain
imaging, but you can do diffusion imaging
for other organs.
You go into a magnet, an MRI machine,
same type of machine, so it's kind of the
same classical hardware. We're going to
just use it differently and what we're
going to get out is measurements about
the brain connectivity.
How is a given region in the brain
connected to a different region in the
brain? Something very cool, how is this
connected to this? Is it connected at
all, for example?
That's what we are trying to do with
diffusion-weighted imaging and it has
been used for neurological disorders, you
know, if the connections are not what we
expect, that might actually mean
something.
It has been used for study, as I say,
normal brain development,
and in general, it's used to study the
structure of fiber bundles,
basically, connections in the brain.
What is the underlying concept in
diffusion-weighted imaging? The
underlying concept is the following.
Let me just run this.
Let's assume, I'm going to make a drawing
here. Let's assume that you have a region
in the brain that is connected to a
different region in the brain.
So, grey matter, basically, and another
region of grey matter in the brain,
and we assume that they're connected by
brain fiber bundles.
Imagine, just cables, okay? So you have
two regions in the brain and you have a
cable connecting between them.
Now, we have water and one efficient way
to imaging is trying to measure the water
diffusion in the brain.
Now, assume that they're trying to make
water go through the bundle in this
direction.
Because the bundle is there, water will
have a challenge to go and to move in
that direction.
Now, if I try to make it go in this
direction,
then, it would actually move in a much
easier fashion.
So if there is a presence of a
connectivity in a given direction, we can
actually try to push the water in
different directions,
and according to how successful we are in
pushing that water,
we can infer the direction of these
bundles and then basically the
connectivity of different regions in the
brain.
So for example, if we try to diffuse the
water, and it goes in every direction,
there's basically no cables.
If we try to diffuse the water and it
goes in every direction, but one,
basically there is a cable in kind of the
orthogonal direction, in the
perpendicular direction.
So if it goes every place, but it just
has really difficulties going here, in
this direction, then something is
stopping it in this direction.
So it's kind of the perpendicular
direction.
Now, you can always, you can also find
crossings, basically find that more than
one direction, it's difficult to make the
water go through.
And in general, you can find basically
the probability of diffusion in every
direction and that gives you the
probability of having connections, cables
in the brain,
this cable, this bundles in the brain
between different directions.
How is that done? The person goes into
the magnet, and basically, there are
gradiants created in different
directions.
So it's kind of you're creating magnetic
fields in different directions.
So, you go around, let's say a circle and
you try to create that field in this
direction to push water in that
direction,
then you try to create a field in this
direction to push water in that
direction.
So you basically do that for multiple
directions and you measure if you can
move those water molecules in that
direction,
then, what you get at the end is
something that looks like this.
You, you get multiple directions, and
basically, people take 32 or 64,
sometimes 128 of these directions
depending how much time can you spend
inside the magnet and created these
gradients in multiple directions.
From that, you can infer the probability
of having a connection in a given
direction, because you infer the
probability of moving basically the water
in a given direction.
So you get all these multiple directions
and from that, as which is said you could
have every single voxel in the image.
So we are in 3D, our brain is 3D, so it's
got pixels without voxels.
Basically it's kind of three-dimensional
pixels,
and,
this is just a slice of a brain and we
here, have here a zoom-in version of one
of the regions and then at every voxel,
you get concept probability of diffusion
in a given direction or a probability of
having these cables in the brain, these
bundles in the brain in a given
direction.
And then, you can consider the whole,
so this, I'm drawing here, the more
round,
it is the more kind of isotropic uniform
probabilities.
The more stretched it is, the more
anisotropic in that direction, and if you
see that there is kind of a cross, then
there is anisotropy in more than one
direction.
You can consider it completely or as we
see here, with this red, which is, can
pick the maximal, what is actually very
strong and that means that probably there
are fibers,
there is cables..
I keep using the word cables,
so, because it's kind of, those that
connect or make basically give the
connectivity or the conductivity between
regions.
So you can only pick the maxima between
those and say, hey, I believe there is a
connection in this direction and maybe,
also in this direction.
We're going through this vault set,
so, in this vault set, we might have
connections going in two directions,
basically, strong connections going in
two different directions.
Now, that's per coxel. What happen if I
want to say, which regions are connected
to this region of the brain or is this
region of the brain connected to this
region of the brain?
So, that's basically, I want to go from
this local measurements that I get from
the machine.
There is some image processing tool,
actually get these denoising,
but basically, most of the work,
basically, is done by these very smart
acquisition.
So you're here,
and you say, I want to know the
probability of connection between now far
away regions.
is this region of my brain connected to
this region?
How can I measure these from these data
that I have just obtained? And look what
we can do,
there are many things that we can do,
but here is one of them.
We can do a Hough transform.
Now, we use, we learn about the Hough
transform to detect straight lines or
curves.
Now, we are actually going to do a Hough
transform for something slightly
different,
but these are still curves.
We want to find, basically, cables in
three-dimensions.
So, this is how we do it.
We basically start, let's say from a
point, and we say, let us find the strong
curves going through this particular
point.
So you can throw, you can just start with
a few samples.
You just put many curves,
you can parametrize this. You can
parametrize almost any function that you
desire.
One of the ways to parametrize is just to
write polynomial function and say, I
want to run, I want to just use a
function that is of this style.
Let me just write an a1+a2, x+a3x^2, and
so on, maybe you go up to six
exponential, seventh,
and then the half is going to vote for
this coefficients. Remember, Hough
transform is great when we have
parametrized curves, and here, I'm
going to just parametrize a curve by a
polynomial, by basically, this function
and x is just it coordinates in xyz in
three-dimension, so these are kind of
vectors. Now, how do you do the voting?
Very simple.
Remember, at every voxel, we have the
probability of going in every direction.
So I take this curve and I say, is this a
good curve?
I go through the voxel and I say, what's
the probability of going at that voxel in
this direction?
So basically, the tangent to the curve
and then you go to the next voxel,
you know, go to the next voxel and you
keep going.
So you add the probabilities that you got
from the data of the diffusion MRI.
When we talk about a Hough transform, we
were kind of adding the edge content.
If there is an edge, we're voting for it.
If there wasn't, we weren't voting for
it.
Here, we actually do a weighted voting.
We vote by the probability of going in
that direction,
but it's a Hough transform.
This is, I think, is very beautiful, that
we can use some very standard theory for
a very cool application in a modern image
acquisation technology.
So, you go, and vote, and vote, and vote,
and then you take another one, and you
vote, and you pick the curve that has the
maximal vote.
So you say, this is the one that most of
it or at least the majority or in a very
strong case, the tangents go in the
direction that the forces tell me there's
a lot of probability, a high probability
of going in that direction, a fiber or a
cable as we have been saying,
then you pick another point and you do
the same, you pick another point and you
do the same.
And in that way, you get these tracks you
get from every point, basically, you get
this probability of having this cables
and connections.
And then you say, is this point connected
to a point, let's say, here?
If there is not a strong cable, a strong
curve, then you say they're not
connected.
You can actually make a binary system,
yes or no, or you can make a probability
decision.
Oh, this is the probability that they are
connected and the probability is as in
Hough transform, the addition of the
local probabilities at each voxel.
In the same way that when we were
detecting simple or straight lines,
we were saying what's basically the
chances that this straight line had many
local edge detectors along it's way.
And when you get that the end is a
beautiful image like this that gives you
a lot of tracks.
It basically gives you a lot of
connections between different regions in
the brain.
And that, you can use for many, many
problems in basic neuroscience in, for
disease, for development or for other
areas.
So to recap, you're going to demand it,
you get these magnetic fields in
different directions,
you compute the probability of having
that cable or a fiber in a given
direction, and when you want to get
information about two points, you use the
Hough transform to do a voting process
and you can get that connection.
And this is not the only way to do that,
it's just one way, and think is a nice
way to illustrate how some tools that
work, developed for image segmentation,
basically, are also applicable in this
new modality.
Now, this has many, many uses,
and for example, you can use diffusion
imaging for the very exciting area of
deep brain stimulation.
And I want to discuss what this deep
brain stimulation and some of the image
processing challenges there.
So let's do that now.
What is deep brain stimulation? Deep
brain stimulation, first of all, is used
for things like Parkinson, essential
tremor, and at the more experimental
level, for clinical depression,
and for OCD, and other neurological
problems.
The basic idea is that, as we see in this
image, an electrode is inserted in the
brain and pulses are sent.
So the electrode is inserted and there's
also a generator that is normally put in
the chest with a battery and that
generator sense electric pulses and
basically stimulates a given region in
the brain.
So it's brain surgery, the patient for
most of the cases is actually awake, and
we are going to see the reason for that.
So there is only local anesthesia, but
the person is actually awake during the
surgery where this electrode is inserted
in the brain and we see kind of a
schematic drawing here.
And I strongly recommend you to go for
example in YouTube and do a search on
deep brain stimulation and you're
going to see the fantastic results of
this surgery and some of the symptoms of,
for example, Parkinson or essential
tremor basically stop immediately when
surgery is finished.
It's a fascinating area.
Now, the big challenge here is to find
the target,
to find where do you want to put that
electrode? That's the big challenge here.
that is normally done with the help of a
number of components,
two of them being a model.
Basically,
brain neurosurgeons know about the brain,
they know the literature and they have
kind of a model of the different regions
in the brain and some are basically
expressed here in a schematic way.
And then they use an atlas,
they basically have an atlas of brains
and they say they know where those
different regions are in the atlas.
And then they get some imaging for that
particular patient, and then, they try to
locate those regions in the images of
that particular patient using this atlas.
Now, one the challenges with the help of
new acquisition techniques, a new image
processing techniques, is not to use the
atlas anymore and to basically do
everything with images from that subject.
The reason that the atlas is sometimes
used, as well as of course the models, is
because the images and image processing
is not great and then you need to use an
atlas to kind of help you navigate inside
the brain.
Now, if we have better images and if we
have better image processing, we might be
able and as going to show you in a
second, we are able to basically localize
the target per subject and then do a
better job.
Now, the way that people are looking into
advancing the brain stimulation is
fascinating for image processing,
because it uses everything that you can
get from an MR machine.
And of course, this is not a class on
magnetic resonance imaging, so I'm just
going to name a few.
We just saw a few minutes ago, diffusion
imaging and we're going to see its role
in a second.
But people use different, basically,
modalities inside the MR,
so the subject is in the magnetic
resonance machine.
It's like, the same hardware, but you
change the software a bit,
and you can get different things like T1,
T2,
susceptibility weighted imaging, and of
course, diffusion imaging as we just saw.
And, to try to combine all of this, what
do I mean by that, you basically register
them, you align that,
basically, we saw, we talk about
registration when we were talking about
HIV and image processing for viruses.
So you put all of them in a coordinated
system, in the same coordinated system.
You might be able to bring the atlas as
well if you wish to do so, and then, when
you have all that, you basically, which
is already one of the images processing
challenges,
you start doing other image processing
things, like for example, image
segmentation.
You might be able to automatically or
semi-automatically, for example, using
active contours, segment, and mark the
regions that a neurosurgeon knows are the
target regions.
So you put, your data log active contours
that are specialized to this type of
challenges.
And the beauty of that is that, when we
talk about active contours, normal,
normally, we talk about gradients of one
image.
Now you can take gradients of multiple
images,
because you have multiple modalities
together.
So you can, we talked about T1, T2, the
susceptibility weighted image,
you can actually compute gradients with
all of them together.
Remember, we talked about vectorial
gradients,
so now at every voxel and I have one
scalar number, I have multiple numbers,
the T1, the T2, the SWI, the
susceptibility weighted imaging, and then
I compute vector gradients and I do this
vector active contours to segment the
regions. You can, of course, and you get
segments like these.
Here are different regions of interest.
The neurosurgeon knows more or less the
regions, where they are, but this gives
are very precise segmentation of the
different regions of interest to help the
neurosurgeon targeting the one that he or
she knows that should be targeted and
that's where the electrode should
basically be touching, so you can give
kind of a future reality of the brain.
It's superimposing these segments that
you get with active contours, basically,
inside a three-dimensional visualization
of the brain.
You can of course, add the
diffusion-weighted imaging that we saw
earlier in this video and this is
represented here with gray, these are the
fibers that we computed. So the
neurosurgeon can start thinking, okay, if
I touch this region because it's
connected to this, then when I put
basically electric pulses there, because
I inserted my, basically, my electrode
there, then that would also affect this
region because they're actually
connected.
So it's not only that you're giving a
good target localization, you're also
telling if you touch here, what's
going to be affected by you touching
there and that's the beauty of putting
all these image processing all together.
And then at the end,
the neurosurgeon did a lot of planning,
and basically say, okay, this is my
target because you help me localize and
you help me figure out the connections.
After surgery, the subject goes into a
CT, and basically, we take a picture of,
this is actually the cable that is
going to be basically going to the chest
for the battery and this is the electrode
that was inserted.
We have segmentations of the regions and
then the neurosurgeon can basically,
after surgery, see, was I in the right
place?
As I say, the subject is awake and the
subject is giving feedback to the
neurosurgeon.
For example, if it's a surgery for
Parkinsons, then you can basically
experiment different behaviors to see if
they improve with the position of the
electrode.
And for example, one is the tremor, if
the tremor stops when you localize the
electrode in a certain place and start
sending certain electric pulses, then you
say, it looks like I'm in a good region
there.
But to work even further, you can, after
surgery visual, visualize everything that
happen, and here is actually real data,
these are segmentations that were
obtained by type of active contours, type
of techniques with all these modalities.
These are the electrodes,
so you go and register one more modality
which is the CT from after surgery and
then the neurosurgeon can say, looks like
I was where I wanted to be, that's great.
I actually saw that during surgery,
because the subject was getting better,
and then, electrodes actually have
multiple contacts,
some have four, some new ones coming to
the market have 16.
And then this post-op images can help the
programmer to say, which one of the
contacts would be more effective
according to the position that I have
localized there?
So a lot of image processing,
we do registration from the different
modalities,
we do segmentation,
and that helps the neurosurgeon to
localize himself or herself inside the
brain of the subject to better do the
surgery,
of course, doing it safer as well.
And, in the same fashion, that is maybe
after surgery to do a better programming
and understanding what was the actual
outcome of the surgery.
Once again, deep brain stimulation is
extremely exciting and I strongly
recommend you, if you just search, for
example, in YouTube, you're going to see
actual patients that talk about how their
life became much better after deep brain
stimulation.
From our perspect of image processing,
tremendous challenges and, and I say, as
I said earlier, basic are the
contributions to humanity are great.
So we're doing very very challenging
image processing and the outcome is
absolutely outstanding and it's hard to
ask for something better than that. I
hope you enjoyed this short video that
shows you a few of the challenges in
brain imaging, which is as I say, one of
the very active areas in medical imaging.
I'm looking forward to see new in the
next video.
Thank you very much.